Yeah.
NOTE CONF
I think.
Okay, so to infinity and beyond.
NOTE CONF
Thank you for coming.
Personally, I think this talk is more fun than yesterday,
NOTE CONF
so I'm a bit surprised that there are fewer people.
Um, it's getting on for 30 years since Toy Story
NOTE CONF
was released.
Do your generation watch it?
NOTE CONF
Yes.
Yep.
NOTE CONF
It's still a pretty good film.
Um, if you remember it.
NOTE CONF
Well, you might remember that.
Well, at least in my understanding of it, which was
NOTE CONF
quite a long time ago, because obviously it's a two
new for me, and it was too young for my
NOTE CONF
son, but I think he watched it anyway.
So therefore I did, um, Buzz Lightyear phrase catch phrase
NOTE CONF
to infinity and beyond.
It's one of the things that makes him look just
NOTE CONF
slightly stupid.
There are lots of things in the film that make
NOTE CONF
him look just slightly stupid.
And part of the point of this talk is that
NOTE CONF
it's not a stupid statement at all.
It's a perfectly reasonable statement.
NOTE CONF
Um, that, of course, is Buzz Lightyear.
This is a large array of copyright, trademark and so
NOTE CONF
on.
Symbols.
NOTE CONF
In a desperate attempt to stop Pixar suing the university
if these slides ever escape into the world.
NOTE CONF
And if you think I'm joking about all this copyright
stuff, I'm not.
NOTE CONF
One of my colleagues gave her inaugural lecture as professor,
and she took a nice picture of a field of
NOTE CONF
flowers off a picture site that advertised that it had
these things available.
NOTE CONF
The slides from the inaugural lecture were duly put on
the web, and a couple of months later, somebody said
NOTE CONF
the site didn't have permission to make these available for
public performance.
NOTE CONF
That'll be £500, please, after they were beaten down from
£5,000.
NOTE CONF
So you should worry about these things.
So what am I talking about today?
NOTE CONF
Obviously infinity, infinity and eternity are closely related concepts.
One we think of as space and the other we
NOTE CONF
think of as time.
But it's all just space time.
NOTE CONF
So they're the same thing in everyday language.
So language of normal people rather than people like me.
NOTE CONF
There are idioms which express various forms of eternity and
infinity.
NOTE CONF
So in English language fairy stories, things often end forever
and ever.
NOTE CONF
And why?
Forever and ever.
NOTE CONF
That's just.
I mean, language says things twice to make them more
NOTE CONF
emphatic.
That's all there is.
NOTE CONF
Other languages are a bit more elegant.
So the German equivalent is imitative, which means basically the
NOTE CONF
same, but has some elegant variation in it.
Um, there's a remarkable number of idioms in English which
NOTE CONF
were coined not by normal people, but by Shakespeare.
So there's a phrase forever and a day, which is
NOTE CONF
actually one of Shakespeare's but became part of the language.
Um, how many of you grew up in the Christian
NOTE CONF
tradition with Latin liturgy?
Anybody?
NOTE CONF
Just a few.
Okay, so, you know, nuns separate in secular secularism at
NOTE CONF
the end of the doxology.
Now and always and in centuries of centuries.
NOTE CONF
In English, we say, as it was, as the beginning
is now and ever shall be, world without end.
NOTE CONF
Um, this isn't a Latin idiom.
It isn't even a Greek idiom.
NOTE CONF
It was probably once an Aramaic idiom, but we don't
actually know.
NOTE CONF
And then Infinity and eternity pop up in various fairy
stories and folktales.
NOTE CONF
This is from the an extract from one of the
stories in the tales collected by the Grimm Brothers.
NOTE CONF
And it goes, the king said.
The third question is how many seconds of time are
NOTE CONF
there in eternity?
Then, said the shepherd boy, in Lower Pomerania is the
NOTE CONF
Diamond Mountain, which is a league high, a league wide,
and a league in depth.
NOTE CONF
Every 100 years, a little bird comes in, sharpens its
beak on it, and when the whole mountain is worn
NOTE CONF
away by this, then the first second of eternity will
be over.
NOTE CONF
How long does that make?
A second of eternity?
NOTE CONF
Well, it depends on your assumptions, doesn't it?
Also, what do you mean by quadrillion, which these days
NOTE CONF
is a bit tricky?
So I get a longer answer.
NOTE CONF
Um, how many of you know what a league is?
Um, I mean, a league is a wildly variable unit
NOTE CONF
of measurement depending on when and where you were.
I think the more or less standard English definition is
NOTE CONF
three miles, but it varies from 2 to 7, I
think somewhere even 14 miles.
NOTE CONF
Um, so making a few assumptions like a league is
three miles and the bird manages to move one atom
NOTE CONF
each time, then that makes a second of eternity somewhere
around ten to the 40 years, which is quite a
NOTE CONF
long time longer than you said.
So I must be making different assumptions, but hey, who
NOTE CONF
cares?
Um.
NOTE CONF
Folktales.
Who reads folktales?
NOTE CONF
Children read folktales for children, get folk tales told to
them.
NOTE CONF
And then I'm going to give you a little quotation
from another wonderful book, which can keep you happy for
NOTE CONF
a very long time.
It's called the Handbook of Mathematical Logic.
NOTE CONF
It's a big yellow book about that thick weighs a
lot.
NOTE CONF
Um, I understand probably about 10% of it.
By the time I die.
NOTE CONF
I might understand 15% of it.
And this says mathematicians and other children often play the
NOTE CONF
following game.
We take turns naming numbers and see who can name
NOTE CONF
the largest one.
This is a game, the psychological rather than the formal
NOTE CONF
sense, since I might always just add one to your
number.
NOTE CONF
But my goal is to try to completely demolish your
ego by transcending your number via some completely new principle.
NOTE CONF
And this is essentially a summary of what set theory
has been doing for the last century.
NOTE CONF
Kenneth Coonan is I think he still is.
I haven't checked recently.
NOTE CONF
Um, one of the leading set theorists of the 20th
century and is responsible not just for some of the
NOTE CONF
biggest numbers, but also for the demonstration that there is
a limit to how big you can keep inventing numbers.
NOTE CONF
There's a thing called the Coonan inconsistency, which is where
your postulation of ever more absurd infinity becomes so absurd
NOTE CONF
that you actually get a contradiction?
Um, so this talk is basically about postulating large numbers.
NOTE CONF
I'm going to start by postulating by talking about infinities.
And these are actually very small infinities.
NOTE CONF
But they will probably look quite large to you.
And then I'll connect them to some very large actual
NOTE CONF
numbers, because big numbers are fun.
And well, that'll be more or less it.
NOTE CONF
And there could be another talk about seriously big infinities,
but not in this course.
NOTE CONF
So let's go back a century and a half.
To Georg Cantor.
NOTE CONF
Um.
Interesting career.
NOTE CONF
He's now one of the.
He's considered the father of set theory.
NOTE CONF
Modern set theory.
He had a very difficult time as an academic because
NOTE CONF
he had crazy ideas which important people didn't like, and
they ensured that he didn't get the positions he wanted
NOTE CONF
because they didn't approve of his ideas.
Um, nowadays we think he was extremely right.
NOTE CONF
So this is a quotation from David Hilbert in about
1901 saying that nobody shall drive us, meaning mathematicians in
NOTE CONF
general, and set theorists in particular, from the Paradise that
Cantor has created for us by inventing set theory in
NOTE CONF
its modern form.
So the first breakthrough in terms of infinity was actually
NOTE CONF
the one I'm not going to talk about today.
You may have heard of it.
NOTE CONF
That's the fact that there are more real numbers than
there are natural numbers, then that real numbers are uncountable.
NOTE CONF
Everything we're going to do is today is actually going
to be countable.
NOTE CONF
And then a bit later, he invented the theory of
ordinal or discovered the theory of ordinal numbers, which is
NOTE CONF
what I will talk about today.
And these are a lot of the more humanly accessible
NOTE CONF
kinds of large numbers and infinity than the stuff that
he thought about earlier.
NOTE CONF
So I want to talk about ordinals and cardinals.
What do they mean?
NOTE CONF
Um, as I've said so often, you may possibly have
studied the grammar of some language in an old fashioned
NOTE CONF
terminology.
And if you had a sufficiently old fashioned grammar textbook,
NOTE CONF
it will have taught you about cardinal numbers in Latin
and ordinal numbers in Latin or Sanskrit or Middle Chinese
NOTE CONF
or whatever.
It was ancient language.
NOTE CONF
It was you had to study, and possibly even in
whatever modern languages you studied.
NOTE CONF
What do we mean in language?
By cardinal numbers, we mean things that count how many
NOTE CONF
of something.
So in English we say there are two dogs over
NOTE CONF
there.
Um, and then we have ordinal, ordinal numbers which put
NOTE CONF
things into a sequence and say which one?
The first dog is black and the second dog is
NOTE CONF
brown.
Um, different languages take different attitudes to how they distinguish
NOTE CONF
these.
English is awkward.
NOTE CONF
For the first couple of numbers we go one, two,
three, first, second, third.
NOTE CONF
It's quite bizarre, actually, that we borrowed a Latin word
for such a fundamental word as second, but they are
NOTE CONF
um.
So in mathematics, we mean basically the same.
NOTE CONF
It turns out that there are two rather different kinds
of ways to count in mathematics, just as there are
NOTE CONF
in language.
So you can take a set and this is just
NOTE CONF
a set in the naive sense that you know it
and you can say how many things are there in
NOTE CONF
it?
How many antecedents are there in the left of, um,
NOTE CONF
sequence in the sequence calculus?
And we call these zero, one, and two, because all
NOTE CONF
modern mathematicians count from zero, except the ones who don't
and they don't count.
NOTE CONF
And the other thing we can do is say we
don't have just a set.
NOTE CONF
We've got a set of things laid out in order.
So that's a list in Haskell terms.
NOTE CONF
And then we can say where in the sequence is
this.
NOTE CONF
So in programming language it's also an array.
And again in all sensible languages we start counting arrays
NOTE CONF
from zero.
So we talk about the zeroth element of the array
NOTE CONF
and the first element and so on.
Alternatively we can say how long is this list.
NOTE CONF
It's one two 3 or 0 elements long.
So as an example the distinction if we talk about
NOTE CONF
this sequence ABBA, that's a sequence that is three letters
long.
NOTE CONF
But if we count the number of distinct letters in
it then there are just two.
NOTE CONF
Okay, I've also said before, at some point in this
course, remember back to probably before you can remember.
NOTE CONF
Do you remember when you first learned to count?
Probably not, because we tend to do it a bit
NOTE CONF
before the age of five, and then we tend to
forget almost everything that happened before the age of five.
NOTE CONF
Um, you've probably got something like that at some point,
but right at the very beginning, probably the absolute first
NOTE CONF
thing you did with counting was to lay down sticks
in a row.
NOTE CONF
Um, in due course, you may find yourself doing this.
Um, so the simplest way of counting is to say
NOTE CONF
that's one that's 210 sticks in a row.
That's ten.
NOTE CONF
This is what we call unary counting in computer science
notation, not binary.
NOTE CONF
Because we don't have digits.
We just lay down sticks in order.
NOTE CONF
So this lets us count lets us count rather inefficiently,
but it lets us count in a long way.
NOTE CONF
Um, and then we can just count forever.
I can just lay down sticks all the way out
NOTE CONF
to the end of the universe.
And where is the universe finite?
NOTE CONF
Is the universe infinite?
I mean, we believe the universe is finite, but expanding.
NOTE CONF
I mean, it's expanding faster than I can lay down
sticks, so maybe I'll never get to the end.
NOTE CONF
Um, can we count forever and a day?
So let's keep counting.
NOTE CONF
Laid on an infinite row of sticks.
And then after that, start another row and put down
NOTE CONF
a new stick.
So clearly that's what Shakespeare meant.
NOTE CONF
He was a set theorist before his time.
This is now getting a bit tedious to write down
NOTE CONF
because I'm writing lots and lots of sticks.
So let me introduce a bit of a notation.
NOTE CONF
Let me use the symbol omega for the length of
the infinite sequence.
NOTE CONF
Have you all learnt your Greek alphabet yet?
Um, even if you haven't, you should know Omega.
NOTE CONF
If you've had any exposure to the Christian tradition.
Again, because I am the Alpha and the Omega occurs
NOTE CONF
somewhere I can't remember where.
So Omega is the last letter of the Greek alphabet,
NOTE CONF
so it tends to get used for things at the
end.
NOTE CONF
And Omega stands for forever.
The infinite number of sticks, which comes after all the
NOTE CONF
other numbers.
And what's a reasonable way to write forever and a
NOTE CONF
day?
Well, it's obviously it's omega sticks plus one stick because
NOTE CONF
I've laid down one stick after laying down omega sticks.
Makes perfect sense, doesn't it?
NOTE CONF
Um, I want to do some more stick diagrams, but
I'm running out of space, so I'm going to do
NOTE CONF
a little trick.
So imagine I've got my row of sticks going out
NOTE CONF
all the way to infinity over there, and then I'm
just going to rotate it so that it's behind me.
NOTE CONF
And now you can see it all at once like
that.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
Perspective is a wonderful thing.
NOTE CONF
So now I have a symbolic representation of Omega.
Now I can start thinking about adding things further.
NOTE CONF
There's omega plus one.
There's omega plus three.
NOTE CONF
So I can do forever and ever as well.
Lay down a row of sticks and then lay down
NOTE CONF
another infinite row of sticks.
Why not?
NOTE CONF
Um.
What happens if I do one plus omega?
NOTE CONF
I lay down a stick, and then I lay down
an infinite row of sticks.
NOTE CONF
Yeah.
You can't tell it apart from just omega.
NOTE CONF
I mean, I've drawn it here because perspective lets you
see that it's slightly different, but we don't have perspective
NOTE CONF
in numbers.
So we have the slightly strange situation.
NOTE CONF
That addition here doesn't mean what we think it's used
to mean.
NOTE CONF
Because if I go one plus omega, I get omega.
But we are mathematicians and so like Humpty Dumpty.
NOTE CONF
Words mean whatever we choose them to mean.
And we choose addition to mean this.
NOTE CONF
Um, if we can do addition, then we can do
multiplication, right?
NOTE CONF
Do you remember learning multiplication?
Yeah, maybe.
NOTE CONF
Probably right at the very beginning, when you learned multiplication,
it was just repeated addition.
NOTE CONF
If I do two times three, that means add three
copies of two together, which is, of course, the definition
NOTE CONF
of multiplication.
Um, so just as a matter of convention, in order
NOTE CONF
to distinguish ordinals from numbers, I'm going to use the
dot multiplication symbol for ordinals rather than the times one.
NOTE CONF
Also to avoid confusion between times and x.
So let me write x dot y to mean y
NOTE CONF
copies of X all added together.
So two times three is three copies of two, which
NOTE CONF
is six.
What's omega times three?
NOTE CONF
Well, it's three copies of ever.
So it's forever and ever and ever.
NOTE CONF
And it looks like that.
What about two times Omega?
NOTE CONF
So that's omega copies of two.
Well, if I take pairs of sticks and lay them
NOTE CONF
down forever, that's indistinguishable from taking one stick and laying
it down forever.
NOTE CONF
So again, we have this situation where two times omega
is the same as Omega.
NOTE CONF
Um.
Are you getting any hint about a general rule about
NOTE CONF
addition and multiplication?
Yeah.
NOTE CONF
Um, if I multiply on the left, or add on
the left by something small and multiply on the right
NOTE CONF
by omega, it's all just omega.
So there's a kind of general rule hitting there, which
NOTE CONF
is something small time.
Something big is just something big.
NOTE CONF
So it's not quite that simple, but roughly.
Yeah.
NOTE CONF
Um, if I can do two times omega, I can
do three times omega and 47 times omega.
NOTE CONF
And I must be able to do omega times omega
two.
NOTE CONF
Okay, so what does Omega look like?
Well, omega times omega is obviously in secular cycle.
NOTE CONF
Autumn through ages of ages.
So we have omega many a Omega, many copies of
NOTE CONF
Omega.
And again we can do our perspective trick and we
NOTE CONF
can lay out an infinite number of rows going that
way, lay them up that way, head up in another
NOTE CONF
dimension somewhere, and look at them like this.
Only only a third dimension.
NOTE CONF
That's not too much to ask.
So there is a graphical representation of Omega Times Omega,
NOTE CONF
which we might as well call omega squared.
Guess what's going to happen next?
NOTE CONF
Well, I'm going to take a little interlude just to
explain why these things are useful before we continue doing
NOTE CONF
absurd things.
What's the point of introducing numbers like this, which are
NOTE CONF
infinite but seem to be a sort of well behaved
kind of infinity?
NOTE CONF
Because we can see how to lay them down and
build them.
NOTE CONF
What's actually important with these numbers is that they are
what's called well-founded.
NOTE CONF
So if I take any of those numbers I've written
down, let's take that one and I go somewhere inside
NOTE CONF
it and I jump to somewhere smaller.
So that means either jumping to the left or maybe
NOTE CONF
jumping down to a smaller to a closer thing to
us if I keep jumping.
NOTE CONF
So when I jump down, I can jump as far
to the right as I like, because everything here is
NOTE CONF
smaller than here.
So even though I might do something like starting there.
NOTE CONF
Jump to their.
Jump jump jump jump jump to their jump jump jump
NOTE CONF
jump.
I'm always going to hit the beginning.
NOTE CONF
I'm always going to reach zero.
So that's a property of all these numbers.
NOTE CONF
If I were to define them properly.
If you keep going down, then after a finite number
NOTE CONF
of steps you must hit zero.
And that's a maybe a slightly counterintuitive property because these
NOTE CONF
are big infinite numbers.
And I'm multiplying infinities by each other.
NOTE CONF
But now I'm telling you that they have a nice
property, that as long as if you jump or at
NOTE CONF
least one step at a time, then you will eventually
hit zero and it won't take you forever to do
NOTE CONF
so.
Um, essentially, because there's no biggest number.
NOTE CONF
So if you're at Omega Plus one and you want
to jump, well, you can go to Omega.
NOTE CONF
But where can you jump from?
From Omega, you have to jump to some finite actual
NOTE CONF
number like 10,000,705.
You can't.
NOTE CONF
So then you have 10 million steps.
Steps and you have to hit zero.
NOTE CONF
Why is that important?
Because that means they give us a general notion of
NOTE CONF
proof by induction.
So who have you think you know?
NOTE CONF
Proof by induction.
Okay, I suspect more of you probably should, but maybe
NOTE CONF
not.
So proof by induction as you learn it in school
NOTE CONF
if you do, or in the first year of courses
here.
NOTE CONF
Basically says if I can prove that if something holds
n, then it holds for n plus one, then it
NOTE CONF
holds for all numbers.
We have to be slightly more careful with ordinals, because
NOTE CONF
we have to worry about things like omega, and there's
no number immediately below omega.
NOTE CONF
So the way we formulate it is to say if
we have some nice property P and it's true for
NOTE CONF
zero, and if it's also the case that if we
can show that it holds for if it holds for
NOTE CONF
every number smaller than alpha alpha, then it holds for
alpha.
NOTE CONF
So that's the equivalent of saying if it holds for
all numbers less than n, then it holds for n.
NOTE CONF
If we have these two things, then we can conclude
that the property holds for all of these ordinal numbers
NOTE CONF
we're generating.
So that's a slightly abstract one.
NOTE CONF
But I'll give you a well I'll give you a
couple of demonstrations of this.
NOTE CONF
So we'll start with a relatively easy one.
Um, this is a fairly condensed talk.
NOTE CONF
So on the whole I'm not stopping for questions, but
if there's a clarification point you want, then shout, okay.
NOTE CONF
So this is recreational.
You're not being examined on it.
NOTE CONF
But nonetheless it's a if there's something that would help
understanding then do shout.
NOTE CONF
So here's an example.
This is a function that you will meet in courses
NOTE CONF
later on.
It's called the Ackermann function.
NOTE CONF
It was very hard to find a picture of Ackermann
and that was the best I could find.
NOTE CONF
Um, it's a function of two arguments which are non-negative
integers.
NOTE CONF
So when I say integer, I mean non-negative integer, and
it's defined like this.
NOTE CONF
So you can write this down in Haskell.
Ackermann of zero comma y is just y plus one.
NOTE CONF
So the successor function Ackermann of x comma zero is
Ackermann of x minus one and one.
NOTE CONF
So you decrease the first argument by one and you
increase the second argument by one.
NOTE CONF
What happens when both arguments are positive?
You do a recursive a nested recursive call.
NOTE CONF
So first of all you compute Ackermann of x comma
y minus one and then you use the result of
NOTE CONF
that as the second argument to Ackermann of x minus
one.
NOTE CONF
Um, is it immediately obvious that this function is always
going to terminate and give a result if you write
NOTE CONF
it in Haskell?
So some people, it's immediately obvious.
NOTE CONF
To some people it's not quite immediately obvious.
Um, if it's not immediate, obvious, immediately obvious, and you
NOTE CONF
start testing it, you might get quite worried.
So if you do four of four, you start expanding
NOTE CONF
it.
And if you were to keep doing it by hand
NOTE CONF
without thinking, you would go on for a seriously long
time, as we'll see shortly.
NOTE CONF
But there is something you can observe about it.
Every time I do a recursive call, either x or
NOTE CONF
y get smaller.
So why is that?
NOTE CONF
Because when I do this recursion x gets smaller.
When I do this recursion.
NOTE CONF
X stays the same and y gets smaller.
So every time you expand the recursive call, something gets
NOTE CONF
smaller and the other thing stays the same.
So essentially you're doing a nested recursion on the x
NOTE CONF
and the y.
And when you do a recursive call, maybe x gets
NOTE CONF
smaller or maybe x stays the same and y gets
smaller smaller.
NOTE CONF
So that is effectively doing an inductive proof on omega
cross omega times omega the natural numbers times the natural
NOTE CONF
numbers.
If you draw out the x and the y and
NOTE CONF
see where it goes, it goes heads down to the
origin.
NOTE CONF
So you will ultimately hit Ackerman of zero comma y.
Nonetheless, if you actually do evaluate this function, and obviously
NOTE CONF
it's trivial to write this down in Haskell so you
can do it enthusiastic among you can do it whilst
NOTE CONF
I'm speaking.
Um, it grows quite fast.
NOTE CONF
We will come back to see how fast it grows.
So that was a little diversion to explain why ordinals
NOTE CONF
are useful, to show that things finish.
I now want to go back to building even more
NOTE CONF
ridiculously large numbers.
When you learn multiplication, you learned it by repeating additions.
NOTE CONF
When you learned exponentiation, which was probably some years later,
you probably learned it as repeated multiplication, right?
NOTE CONF
Because that's the definition of exponentiation, at least until you
have to start worrying about what e to the I
NOTE CONF
theta means.
So when we write x to the y, that means
NOTE CONF
y copies of x multiplied together.
Well, that is not too hard.
NOTE CONF
We can just continue thinking about omega squared omega times
omega.
NOTE CONF
We've seen yet again two to the omega.
Well, that's infinitely many copies of two multiplied together, which
NOTE CONF
is basically indistinguishable from infinity.
Omega Omega cubed, on the other hand, is omega times,
NOTE CONF
omega times, omega or omega copies of Omega Squared, and
we can kind of visualise it like that.
NOTE CONF
Um, how far am I going to go?
Well, at some point my ability to draw diagrams runs
NOTE CONF
out and my ability to draw diagrams runs out about
there.
NOTE CONF
So this is an obviously inaccurate representation of Omega to
the Omega, but it looks something like that.
NOTE CONF
And incidentally, these diagrams are generated not even in pure
LaTeX.
NOTE CONF
They're generated in pure text.
So no graphics packages here.
NOTE CONF
Um, but you can see and you can also see
how the kind of, well, handedness works, because if I'm
NOTE CONF
somewhere in here and I jump to the left or
down and left or down, ultimately I'm going to hit
NOTE CONF
the bottom left.
So what are we doing for time, as always?
NOTE CONF
Not enough.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
I'll take a quick pause.
Any quick questions at this point?
NOTE CONF
Yeah.
So.
NOTE CONF
We're basically being 100% right.
So we're coming to this system.
NOTE CONF
And this number can get to zero by subtracting, you
know, this one a finite number of times.
NOTE CONF
Which doesn't make sense.
Ah.
NOTE CONF
But that yes.
So that's a very good point.
NOTE CONF
And you're now kind of spoiling the next ten minutes.
But that's okay.
NOTE CONF
So the question is what happens if you do some
subtraction and you get Omega say how do you subtract
NOTE CONF
one from Omega.
There is no number immediately below omega.
NOTE CONF
So that's what we're about to see.
So so you should be able to solve this little
NOTE CONF
puzzle.
So this is a slightly strange concept, but it kind
NOTE CONF
of makes sense.
You know what it means to write numbers in base
NOTE CONF
seven.
Or at least you know what it means to write
NOTE CONF
numbers in base two, and you should know what it
means to write numbers in base seven.
NOTE CONF
This is a kind of expanded base notation, where we
think about writing a number as the sum of powers
NOTE CONF
of two.
So writing it in binary basically.
NOTE CONF
But then we look at the exponents of the powers
of two, and we write those in binary as well.
NOTE CONF
So we end up saying that a number like 1030
can be written as two to the power of two,
NOTE CONF
to the power of two plus one plus two plus
two to the power, two plus two.
NOTE CONF
So basically we're not allowed to use any digit larger
than two.
NOTE CONF
And we have to write out the number as a
sum of powers of powers or powers.
NOTE CONF
If I were to do it with three then I
would end up writing something like this.
NOTE CONF
So you can take my word for it that these
are correct.
NOTE CONF
I think I checked them.
That's what The number 1030 looks like in this so-called
NOTE CONF
hereditary base three.
And then the puzzle goes like this.
NOTE CONF
Think of a number, any number n write it in
hereditary base two.
NOTE CONF
Now wherever you see the digit two, replace it by
three.
NOTE CONF
Evaluate the result.
The number's going to get much bigger.
NOTE CONF
Subtract one from that number.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
Write it in hereditary base three.
Again.
NOTE CONF
Everywhere you see three, replace it by four.
Evaluate it.
NOTE CONF
It's going to get much bigger again.
Subtract one.
NOTE CONF
Keep on going until you hit zero.
If you hit zero.
NOTE CONF
Um, so the Goodstein function g of n is how
many steps of this process it takes to hit zero.
NOTE CONF
And the question is, is that a sensible number or
is it infinity?
NOTE CONF
Um.
Any bets?
NOTE CONF
Yeah.
Finite.
NOTE CONF
Anybody going for infinite?
Okay.
NOTE CONF
Right.
This is a deliberately deceptive way of writing it.
NOTE CONF
Okay, so now let's think about it.
But let's also, I mean, when you get a puzzle
NOTE CONF
like this, it helps to try a few examples.
What is the value of the Goodstein function?
NOTE CONF
For example, how many steps does it take.
So is your question going to anticipate something or not?
NOTE CONF
I was going to say that when.
Uh, each time you subtract one, you're eventually going to
NOTE CONF
remove a digit from this.
Yes.
NOTE CONF
So we'll see that in action now.
But let's think about what the numbers are.
NOTE CONF
So here is let's think about the good steam function
applied to the value three.
NOTE CONF
Now back sometime in the 80s or 90s, I forget
when there was some conservative politician who was cutting public
NOTE CONF
spending in ways that are familiar to us.
And they said, there is no magic money tree.
NOTE CONF
So here's a magic money tree.
Why is it magic?
NOTE CONF
It has wonderful little gold sovereigns as leaves.
And each day you can pluck one of the gold
NOTE CONF
sovereigns.
And then something happens to the tree.
NOTE CONF
So the tree has dead nodes and live nodes.
And what happens is each day, each live node grows
NOTE CONF
another leaf with a nice gold coin on the end.
And then you pluck a sovereign, and if you're sensible,
NOTE CONF
you pluck it from one of the dead nodes.
Okay, so we get that.
NOTE CONF
What happens on the next day the tree grows another
leaf there with a gold coin, another fruit, gold fruit.
NOTE CONF
And now you have to pluck from there.
But when you pluck from a live node, you kill
NOTE CONF
it and it can't go anymore.
So when you keep plucking your gold coins.
NOTE CONF
You're going to.
After six days, you'll go back to the tree and
NOTE CONF
find there's nothing more to pluck.
So in terms of this hereditary base B, which I'm
NOTE CONF
not sure is actually point, well, it's the point that
was just made here.
NOTE CONF
If I look at the expansion here, three is two
plus one.
NOTE CONF
So I replace two by three and write it out
again.
NOTE CONF
Well that's really just subtracting one.
So I get three plus one and then three and
NOTE CONF
then four.
And then four has to be replaced.
NOTE CONF
I have to subtract one from four which gives me
three.
NOTE CONF
And then I no longer have the magic base digit
in my number.
NOTE CONF
And now it just dies off.
So that's the reason why you can see that actually
NOTE CONF
this always finishes, but you might wonder how long it
takes to finish.
NOTE CONF
So starting with the number three here, the magic money
tree that started with three fruits on it took six
NOTE CONF
days to run out of money.
If I start with four.
NOTE CONF
What do you think happens?
How long do you think it takes to run out
NOTE CONF
of money?
Much, much longer.
NOTE CONF
Much longer.
How much is much longer, I wonder?
NOTE CONF
Well, let's have a quick look at it.
You'll notice that I've written live nodes in two sizes.
NOTE CONF
That's because these are super fertile live nodes.
They don't just expand the fruits, they do something more
NOTE CONF
complicated.
So when I take money off this one, I'm going
NOTE CONF
to pluck a live node which is going to kill
a node.
NOTE CONF
But on that day, not only did these nodes grow
new fruits and this node grew a new fruit, but
NOTE CONF
this node grew a whole new level of new fruits.
So the tree actually expanded to that.
NOTE CONF
That was the original root.
And just before it died, it managed to spout off
NOTE CONF
a new level of live nodes.
These are now ordinary life nodes.
NOTE CONF
And then what happens?
Well, I'm going to pluck a thing from up here,
NOTE CONF
but when I do that, everything else is ground going
to grow.
NOTE CONF
Lots and lots more.
So you can see it might go on for quite
NOTE CONF
a long time.
And my latex skills got a bit.
NOTE CONF
I got just got bored with later seeing these diagrams.
So then we come to the question of, well, we've
NOTE CONF
we've been led into thinking that g of for the
number of days it takes for that tree to die
NOTE CONF
is not probably infinity.
It's probably some large number.
NOTE CONF
And somebody said a large number.
Anybody want to guess what kind of large number it
NOTE CONF
might be?
A Google and who can remember what a googol is.
NOTE CONF
Yeah.
Ten to the 100.
NOTE CONF
Anybody going to go for a Googleplex which is ten
to the power of the Google.
NOTE CONF
Well let's see, Google is actually a pretty good guess.
Um, but I computed this number for you.
NOTE CONF
So.
That is not G of four.
NOTE CONF
That's the first few digits of g of four.
Now, I don't know how long you're willing to sit
NOTE CONF
here, but I imagine you're not willing for me to
skip through 135,000 slides.
NOTE CONF
And all of those slides were computed.
They were not typeset because LaTeX cannot typeset 135,000 slides.
NOTE CONF
And yes, I did try just to see whether it
could.
NOTE CONF
Um, and those are the last few digits.
Um, so no, actually ten to the Google was not
NOTE CONF
a good guess.
Why did I say, well, it depends on what you
NOTE CONF
mean by big small and what's a good guess.
So it's actually something around ten to the 121 million,
NOTE CONF
which is a lot bigger than a Google, but a
lot smaller than a Google Plex.
NOTE CONF
So somewhere in between, um, that that's the exact value
of G of four.
NOTE CONF
Um, would you care to hazard a guess as to
what G of five is?
NOTE CONF
I mean, it's going to be a big number, right?
So I'm going to have to write some quite large
NOTE CONF
power of tens, tower of tens to talk about it.
Um, I can tell you how how high this Tower
NOTE CONF
of exponents is.
Unfortunately, in order to do so, I first have to
NOTE CONF
write down another stack of tens.
But I can tell you how high this tower of
NOTE CONF
tens is, provided you let me write down another stack
of powers of tens.
NOTE CONF
But I can tell you how high this one is.
Okay, so this is by sort of any normal understanding,
NOTE CONF
quite a big number, although mathematicians do work with much
larger numbers.
NOTE CONF
Um, and you can go on, you can try to
work out G of six.
NOTE CONF
It gets quite tedious trying to do.
This was all done with pen and paper after G
NOTE CONF
of four.
Um, why does the function always terminate?
NOTE CONF
Well, we've had the explanation during the questions and conversation
anyway, and essentially it's because this magic hereditary base B
NOTE CONF
why did I call it B it would actually be
quite nice to call it Omega.
NOTE CONF
Um, if I were to call it Omega, then four
is two to the power, two which I write as
NOTE CONF
omega to the omega, and then subtracting one from that
basically means expanding out omega for the current value of
NOTE CONF
the base as much as necessary, until I can actually
do some subtraction.
NOTE CONF
So here I've switched the base from 2 to 3,
and now I have to subtract one from omega to
NOTE CONF
the omega.
I can't do that.
NOTE CONF
So I say oh well Omega is three at the
moment.
NOTE CONF
So let's lets them make that omega cubed.
I can't subtract one from omega cubed, so I just
NOTE CONF
expand it to be omega squared plus omega squared plus
omega squared and so on and so on and so
NOTE CONF
on.
And eventually I end up with omega squared plus omega
NOTE CONF
squared plus omega plus omega plus two as the result
of subtracting one from omega cubed.
NOTE CONF
If I'm pretending that omega is three and now I
stop pretending that omega is three, and then it becomes
NOTE CONF
four, five, six.
And so whilst this number is getting bigger and bigger,
NOTE CONF
this fictional ordinal here is getting smaller and smaller.
And ultimately we hit the point where we've reduced to
NOTE CONF
this to Omega and then expands to the current value
of the base, and then you're just subtracting one for
NOTE CONF
the rest of it.
So you spend half the time going up and half
NOTE CONF
the time going down.
Roughly speaking.
NOTE CONF
Exactly.
Speaking this side note is something that only occurred to
NOTE CONF
me last year and it still boggles me.
So think about that.
NOTE CONF
So the Goodstein function is something that clearly grows quite
fast.
NOTE CONF
Year four is huge.
Year five is incomprehensible.
NOTE CONF
The Ackermann function grows quite fast as well.
So this is what the Ackermann function looks like as
NOTE CONF
a table of x and y.
Um, as the first argument gets bigger, the numbers get
NOTE CONF
bigger.
Similarly with y.
NOTE CONF
Once x hits four, then it starts starts getting big
quite quickly as you.
NOTE CONF
When x is four, basically you get a new level
of power of two every time you increase y.
NOTE CONF
Um, so which is growing faster?
Ackermann or Goodstein?
NOTE CONF
So Ackermann is a two argument function.
So let's turn it into a one argument function by
NOTE CONF
taking the diagonal like that.
Okay, so here's a table of the first few values
NOTE CONF
of these competing functions.
And you can see that although Goodstein is going pretty
NOTE CONF
fast, Ackermann is a long way ahead of it at
four.
NOTE CONF
Um, now to think about what happens any further, I
have to go back to building big numbers again.
NOTE CONF
Exponentiation is iterated multiplication.
Multiplication is iterated addition.
NOTE CONF
We can iterate exponentiation again.
We did these tiles of ten.
NOTE CONF
Why don't we have a notation for talking about towers
of 10 or 2?
NOTE CONF
Because we're computer scientists.
Um, it's called titration because it's the fourth level of
NOTE CONF
exponential iterating stuff, sometimes written like that, sometimes written like
that, and lots of other notations.
NOTE CONF
It's not useful enough to have a completely standard notation.
And now I'm going to introduce a handy little bit
NOTE CONF
of terminology which will let me avoid writing.
Trying to write down extremely big numbers.
NOTE CONF
Let's say that a number is small if it's small
in some humanly comprehensible sense, so I don't really care
NOTE CONF
what you mean by small.
Maybe you mean five, maybe you mean a few hundred.
NOTE CONF
Maybe you have a big brain and you mean a
million.
NOTE CONF
It doesn't matter.
And I'm going to call it big at level 1
NOTE CONF
or 1 big if it's two to the power of
something small.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
And I'm going to call it two big if it
NOTE CONF
is two titrated to the power of something small.
So that means express.
NOTE CONF
It's expressible as a stack of powers of two.
But the height of the stack is small for whatever
NOTE CONF
your favourite value of small is.
And so on and so on.
NOTE CONF
So three big is something that is two penetrated to
the towers small.
NOTE CONF
So you have a small number of iterated stacks of
like I was doing for G of five.
NOTE CONF
So if we extend the comparison table, it now looks
like this G of four was a two big function.
NOTE CONF
It was a power of two's that was small in
height.
NOTE CONF
G of five was a three big thing.
We had to have an extended expanded row of brackets
NOTE CONF
describing towers of two, and it turns out the same
happens with Ackermann at level five.
NOTE CONF
When X is five, you also get something that is
roughly three big.
NOTE CONF
Um, but this is where Goodstein starts pulling ahead.
So you are right.
NOTE CONF
So at six it pulls ahead.
We now have four big numbers.
NOTE CONF
But Goodstein has gone to level five of bigness seven
five big and seven big.
NOTE CONF
Um and this is where things get a little bit
absurd, because at level eight, the good steam function is
NOTE CONF
now G of four big.
Um, which is kind of silly.
NOTE CONF
What does that look like?
Sorry.
NOTE CONF
I mean, one can't write it down, right?
You can only write this in mathematical notation.
NOTE CONF
Um, I mean, I'll well, actually, I'll.
And you can keep doing this forever.
NOTE CONF
So again, some more informal terminology.
I can call a number huge at level one if
NOTE CONF
it's big at level one big and I can call
it two huge if it's big at level one huge
NOTE CONF
and I can so on and I can call it
one humongous if it's one huge huge.
NOTE CONF
Now these of course are not real definitions, but they
are in fact just an informal version of very real
NOTE CONF
definitions in large cardinal theory, which is something about genuine,
seriously big infinities to which all these things are tiny
NOTE CONF
and you just keep going.
And when this happens, depends on whether you're a set
NOTE CONF
theorist or not.
If you are a set theorist, happens at the Koonin
NOTE CONF
inconsistency when your universe explodes.
Um, I said do it to infinity.
NOTE CONF
But of course we're actually doing it beyond infinity.
Um, we can keep doing this exponentiation trick so I
NOTE CONF
can go Omega omega to the omega omega to the
omega to the omega.
NOTE CONF
Then I can define this thing called, which we call
epsilon zero, which is omega titrated to the omega.
NOTE CONF
So it's an omega high stack of powers of omega.
It's actually a useful number.
NOTE CONF
Um, it's an interesting fact that if you take this
thing and do omega to the epsilon nought, then you
NOTE CONF
get the same thing again, just as if we took
omega of the Omega and multiplied it by Omega, it
NOTE CONF
was still Omega to the Omega.
So what that means is that epsilon zero is what
NOTE CONF
we call the fixed point of the function.
The omega exponential exponentiation function.
NOTE CONF
And this is this is the recipe for going on
forever.
NOTE CONF
So now you can say well if there's one fixed
point there's probably a second fixed point.
NOTE CONF
And we can actually compute that by adding one to
the first and then exponentiating it forever and ever.
NOTE CONF
You can keep on going.
Then you can talk about epsilon sub epsilon sub epsilon,
NOTE CONF
which is the first fixed point of the function that
counts the epsilon numbers.
NOTE CONF
And you just well keep going.
So you're now counting functions and then you're computing fixed
NOTE CONF
points of functions and counting the fixed points and counting
the fixed points of the functions that count them, and
NOTE CONF
so on.
This gives you a thing called the Veblen hierarchy.
NOTE CONF
And the n process of that is some enormous ordinal
which is actually used inside in proof theory.
NOTE CONF
It's called gamma nought.
After that, it starts getting complicated and it is way
NOTE CONF
beyond my level of understanding.
So my understanding stops here and I don't have that
NOTE CONF
understanding all the time.
Only when I revise it.
NOTE CONF
Um, is this all just a game for mathematicians and
other children?
NOTE CONF
Does it have any use?
Well, actually it does.
NOTE CONF
So the working theoretical computer scientists.
By which I mean people like me, we use ordinals
NOTE CONF
to do inductions to prove that some function terminates, like
the Ackermann function or some function that we actually write
NOTE CONF
down.
I have had to prove that a function terminates.
NOTE CONF
Generally speaking, we don't need big ordinals to do this
up to omega.
NOTE CONF
To the omega is as far as one tends to
go in the kind of functions that we write in
NOTE CONF
everyday life.
But it turns out that proof theorists and proof theorists
NOTE CONF
are people who work on things like the sequent calculus
and the basic theory of that, and a lot of
NOTE CONF
them are in computer science departments, because there's more money
in computer science departments than there is in math departments.
NOTE CONF
And computer scientists have a more favourable view of logic
than other mathematicians do.
NOTE CONF
Um, they need much bigger ordinals, because it turns out
that in a remarkably beautiful way that if you have
NOTE CONF
a proof, a system of proof, you want to know
how much can I prove with it?
NOTE CONF
The perfect proof system would be able to prove every
true mathematical theorem.
NOTE CONF
We know that's impossible, but you can take your favourite
theory and ask how much can it prove?
NOTE CONF
And it turns out that these ordinals give you a
very precise and nice measure of how much a theory
NOTE CONF
can prove.
Um, so if you've ever come across a thing called
NOTE CONF
piano arithmetic, it's not actually strong enough to prove that
the Goodstein function always terminates.
NOTE CONF
Why do we care about proof theory?
Well, we do formal verification of systems.
NOTE CONF
We do that by building computer tools that work in
a proof theory, and do the proofs for us to
NOTE CONF
make sure that they're correct.
And it's quite nice to know what the strength of
NOTE CONF
the system we're working in is.
And it's also quite nice to know how long it
NOTE CONF
might take to prove something.
And sometimes the fact that a proof has a large
NOTE CONF
ordinal associated with it also means that the proofs can
get very long, in the same way that the Goodstein
NOTE CONF
function can get very big.
So if you're unlucky, there are things that if you
NOTE CONF
try to prove it, you might end up with a
proof.
NOTE CONF
In the sequent calculus that is expanding like the Goodstein
function expands.
NOTE CONF
And that would be bad news because we don't have
computers that big.
NOTE CONF
Um, okay, so for the first time in recorded history,
I've finished in an hour exactly from when I started.
NOTE CONF
So as a final comment, these things are all very
small.
NOTE CONF
These are all countable infinities.
They're all things that you can count natural numbers, whereas
NOTE CONF
if you do it in a funny order.
So the actual Cantor in Revolution was about the real
NOTE CONF
numbers, and I haven't gone there at all.
That's for another talk given by somebody else in some
NOTE CONF
other place.
So thank you for coming to the course.
NOTE CONF
I've had fun for the last 11 weeks, I hope.
Well, the fact that you're here means you probably have.
NOTE CONF
I hope the people who aren't here have as well.
Um, enjoy your lack of exams for this course.
NOTE CONF
Good luck in the exams for your other course, and
I will see you around over the next 3 to
NOTE CONF
4 years.
Somewhere, sometime.
NOTE CONF
After you are.